README.md, before:

# Big Data Management Systems - Assignments

The current repository hosts the assignments in the context of the course "Big Data Management Systems" by Prof. Chatziantoniou in the Department of Management Science and Technology in the Athens University of Economics and Business. 

## Assignment 1 - Hadoop

In this assignment, the core objective is to implement the KMeans Clustering Algorithm in a Haddoop environment. More specificaly, the Mapper and Reducer functions should be implemented. The project can be found [here](hadoop/) in more detail.

## Assignment 2 - Redis

This assignment involves creating a system similar to Teams or Zoom where admins can set up meetings and users can join or leave them. The system will use a key-value store called Redis to store information about users, meetings, and meeting instances, as well as a log of events. The events can include users joining or leaving a meeting, and a meeting can be public or have a specific audience. The project will involve implementing several functions in Python or Java that connect to Redis, including functions for joining and leaving meetings, posting chat messages, and displaying information about meetings and participants.

# Team
- [Priovolos Philippos](https://github.com/Philippos01) (8190147)
- [Dimitris Bouris](https://github.com/dbouris) (8190119)

Commit message:

add the assignment in the core README file

README.md, after:

# Big Data Management Systems - Assignments

The current repository hosts the assignments in the context of the course "Big Data Management Systems" by Prof. Chatziantoniou in the Department of Management Science and Technology in the Athens University of Economics and Business. 

## Assignment 1 - Hadoop

In this assignment, the core objective is to implement the KMeans Clustering Algorithm in a Haddoop environment. More specificaly, the Mapper and Reducer functions should be implemented. The project can be found [here](hadoop/) in more detail.

## Assignment 2 - Redis

This assignment involves creating a system similar to Teams or Zoom where admins can set up meetings and users can join or leave them. The system will use a key-value store called Redis to store information about users, meetings, and meeting instances, as well as a log of events. The events can include users joining or leaving a meeting, and a meeting can be public or have a specific audience. The project will involve implementing several functions in Python or Java that connect to Redis, including functions for joining and leaving meetings, posting chat messages, and displaying information about meetings and participants.

## Assignment 3 - Azure Stream Analytics

This assignment involves setting up an full Azure Stream Analytics job to process a data stream of ATM transactions and answer various stream queries. The project can be found [here](azure-stream-analytics/) in more detail.

# Team
- [Priovolos Philippos](https://github.com/Philippos01) (8190147)
- [Dimitris Bouris](https://github.com/dbouris) (8190119)
